Drafts: Composable DropdownMenu v2 (#1735)
primer/react: docs/content/drafts/DropdownMenu2.mdx

---
component_id: dropdown_menu

> title: DropdownMenu v2

Author: Yeeep! https://primer-react-jop9n8zni-primer.vercel.app/react/drafts/DropdownMenu2

> title: DropdownMenu v2

Reviewer: Thanks 🙏

status: Alpha
source: https://github.com/primer/react/tree/main/src/DropdownMenu2.tsx
storybook: '/react/storybook?path=/story/composite-components-dropdownmenu2'

> description: DropdownMenu is an ActionList-based component for creating a small menu of options to select one option from.

Reviewer: For other components, we're using more active wording. Can we do the same here?

Maybe something like...

```suggestion
description: Use DropdownMenu to select a single option from a list of menu options.
```

---

import {Box, Text, Avatar} from '@primer/react'
import {DropdownMenu, ActionList} from '@primer/react/drafts'
import {Props} from '../../src/props'
import State from '../../components/State'
import {CalendarIcon, IterationsIcon, NumberIcon, SingleSelectIcon, TypographyIcon} from '@primer/octicons-react'

<br />

> <State default={1}>

Reviewer: This example appears at the top of docs, but with more recent updates we've been moving them under examples heading and keeping import statements at the top. Can we do the same here for consistency?

Author: Yep!

I added an example on the top for ActionList, ActionMenu as well to quickly see what this component is. Meanwhile, the examples slowly build up starting from an easy example to more complex ones.

Reviewer: Looks quite nice actually, almost like a preview / hero.

👍 .. we'll need to comm this to others so we can consider doing same elsewhere.

  {([selectedIndex, setSelectedIndex]) => {
    const fieldTypes = [
      {icon: TypographyIcon, name: 'Text'},
      {icon: NumberIcon, name: 'Number'},
      {icon: CalendarIcon, name: 'Date'},
      {icon: SingleSelectIcon, name: 'Single select'},
      {icon: IterationsIcon, name: 'Iteration'}
    ]
    const selectedType = fieldTypes[selectedIndex]
    return (
      <Box sx={{border: '1px solid', borderColor: 'border.default', borderRadius: 2, padding: 6}}>

>         <Text sx={{fontSize: 1, mb: 1}}>Select field type:</Text>

Reviewer: Visually this example feels very similar to form selects. Is this correct usage for this kind of component? Should we remove label here? 

To avoid confusion, shall we clarify that users use `Select` and `InputGroup` if they need labels? cc. @mperrotti 

![Screenshot 2022-01-14 at 14 43 52](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/13340707/149534252-b7a46af0-a949-4ce6-9e46-85a813c51922.png)

Author: Oof, good point. I can remove the label here to avoid confusion

        <DropdownMenu>
          <DropdownMenu.Button aria-label="Select field type" leadingIcon={selectedType.icon}>
            {selectedType.name}
          </DropdownMenu.Button>
          <DropdownMenu.Overlay width="medium">
            <ActionList>
              {fieldTypes.map((type, index) => (
                <ActionList.Item
                  key={index}
                  selected={index === selectedIndex}
                  onSelect={() => setSelectedIndex(index)}
                >
                  <type.icon /> {type.name}
                </ActionList.Item>
              ))}
            </ActionList>
          </DropdownMenu.Overlay>
        </DropdownMenu>
      </Box>
    )
  }}
</State>

<br />

```js

> import {DropdownMenu} from '@primer/react/drafts'

Reviewer: Can we also hoist the import to the top of the page?

> import {DropdownMenu} from '@primer/react/drafts'

Author: Aw this is short lived, would need to remove this after https://github.com/primer/react/pull/1785 is merged

```

<br />

## Examples

### Minimal example

`DropdownMenu` ships with `DropdownMenu.Button` which is an accessible trigger for the overlay. It's recommended to compose `ActionList` with `DropdownMenu.Overlay`

&nbsp;

```javascript live noinline
// import {DropdownMenu, ActionList} from '@primer/react/drafts'
const {DropdownMenu, ActionList} = drafts // ignore docs silliness; import like that ↑

const fieldTypes = [
  {icon: TypographyIcon, name: 'Text'},
  {icon: NumberIcon, name: 'Number'},
  {icon: CalendarIcon, name: 'Date'},
  {icon: SingleSelectIcon, name: 'Single select'},
  {icon: IterationsIcon, name: 'Iteration'}
]

const Example = () => {
  const [selectedIndex, setSelectedIndex] = React.useState(1)
  const selectedType = fieldTypes[selectedIndex]

  return (
    <DropdownMenu>
      <DropdownMenu.Button aria-label="Select field type" leadingIcon={selectedType.icon}>
        {selectedType.name}
      </DropdownMenu.Button>
      <DropdownMenu.Overlay width="medium">
        <ActionList>

>           {fieldTypes.map((type, index) => (

Reviewer: Nit for casing consistency.

```suggestion
{fieldTypes.map(({icon: Icon, name}, index) => (
```

so that you can do 

`<Icon /> {name}` instead of `<type.icon /> {type.name}`

Author: Done!

            </ActionList.Item>
          ))}
        </ActionList>
      </DropdownMenu.Overlay>
    </DropdownMenu>
  )
}

render(<Example />)
```

### Customise Button

`Dropdown.Button` uses `Button v2` so you can pass props like `variant` and `leadingIcon` that `Button v2` accepts.

```javascript live noinline
// import {DropdownMenu, ActionList} from '@primer/react/drafts'
const {DropdownMenu, ActionList} = drafts // ignore docs silliness; import like that ↑

const Example = () => {
  const [duration, setDuration] = React.useState(1)

  return (
    <DropdownMenu>
      <DropdownMenu.Button variant="invisible" aria-label="Select iteration duration">
        {duration} {duration > 1 ? 'weeks' : 'week'}
      </DropdownMenu.Button>
      <DropdownMenu.Overlay width="medium">
        <ActionList>
          {[1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6].map(weeks => (
            <ActionList.Item key={weeks} selected={duration === weeks} onSelect={() => setDuration(weeks)}>
              {weeks} {weeks > 1 ? 'weeks' : 'week'}
            </ActionList.Item>
          ))}
        </ActionList>
      </DropdownMenu.Overlay>
    </DropdownMenu>
  )
}

render(<Example />)
```

### With External Anchor

> To create an anchor outside of the menu, you need to switch to controlled mode for the menu and pass it as `anchorRef` to `DropdownMenu`:

Reviewer: Could we elaborate on this? And should it be uncontrolled mode instead? Or maybe neither as it appears to run in controlled mode by default? and we're not really mutating ref state either?

Author: > And should it be uncontrolled mode instead?

When you pull the open/close out, that's controlled mode. By default, you don't have to control that. Changed the text a little to make that clear.

// import {DropdownMenu, ActionList} from '@primer/react/drafts'
const {DropdownMenu, ActionList} = drafts // ignore docs silliness; import like that ↑

const fieldTypes = [
  {icon: TypographyIcon, name: 'Text'},
  {icon: NumberIcon, name: 'Number'},
  {icon: CalendarIcon, name: 'Date'},
  {icon: SingleSelectIcon, name: 'Single select'},
  {icon: IterationsIcon, name: 'Iteration'}
]

const Example = () => {
  const handleEscape = () => alert('you hit escape!')

  const [selectedIndex, setSelectedIndex] = React.useState(1)
  const selectedType = fieldTypes[selectedIndex]

  return (
    <DropdownMenu>
      <DropdownMenu.Button aria-label="Select field type" leadingIcon={selectedType.icon}>
        {selectedType.name}
      </DropdownMenu.Button>
      <DropdownMenu.Overlay width="medium" onEscape={handleEscape}>
        <ActionList>
          {fieldTypes.map((type, index) => (
            <ActionList.Item key={index} selected={index === selectedIndex} onSelect={() => setSelectedIndex(index)}>
              <type.icon /> {type.name}
            </ActionList.Item>
          ))}
        </ActionList>
      </DropdownMenu.Overlay>
    </DropdownMenu>
  )
}

render(<Example />)
```

> ### With a custom anchor

Reviewer: anchor may be confusing for readers as it's used in a different context further up
```suggestion
### With a custom trigger
```

Author: We call this `anchor` because the menu still anchors on `DropdownMenu.Anchor`.

You can choose to have a different _anchor_ for the Menu dependending on the application's context.

&nbsp;

```javascript live noinline
// import {DropdownMenu, ActionList} from '@primer/react/drafts'
const {DropdownMenu, ActionList} = drafts // ignore docs silliness; import like that ↑

render(
  <DropdownMenu>
    <DropdownMenu.Anchor>
      <button>Select a field type</button>
    </DropdownMenu.Anchor>

    <DropdownMenu.Overlay>
      <ActionList>
        <ActionList.Item selected={true}>Text</ActionList.Item>
        <ActionList.Item>Number</ActionList.Item>
        <ActionList.Item>Date</ActionList.Item>
        <ActionList.Item>Iteration</ActionList.Item>
      </ActionList>
    </DropdownMenu.Overlay>
  </DropdownMenu>
)
```

<Note variant="warning">

> Use `DropdownMenu` to select an option from a small list. If you’re looking for filters or multiple selection, use [SelectPanel](/SelectPanel) instead.

Reviewer: This feels quite important, shall we hoist it near the top of page so it has better visibility? We've done this for other components before.

Author: This came up before with ActionMenu. What we decided was that [interface guidelines](https://primer.style/design/components/action-list#application) is the first place where you learn which component to use, and this is the second note near `props` just in case you missed that.

</Note>

> ## Props / API reference

Reviewer: Can we change this for consistency with #1701 please?

```suggestion
## Props
```

### DropdownMenu

> | Name         | Type                           | Default | Description                                                                                                              |

Reviewer 2: Why not use `PropsTable`?

Reviewer: Yeah, would be super-helpful if we can switch this to the prop tables please 🙏

Author: Because this was created before PropsTable 😅 

Will update it now that we have it 🎉

Author: Done :)

| children\*                               | `React.ReactElement[] | React.ReactElement` | Required. Recommended: [`ActionList`](/drafts/ActionList2)                                    |
| [OverlayProps](/Overlay#component-props) | -                     |          -          | Optional. Props to be spread on the internal [`AnchoredOverlay`](/AnchoredOverlay) component. |

## Status

<ComponentChecklist
  items={{
    propsDocumented: true,
    noUnnecessaryDeps: true,
    adaptsToThemes: true,
    adaptsToScreenSizes: true,
    fullTestCoverage: true,
    usedInProduction: false,
    usageExamplesDocumented: true,
    hasStorybookStories: true,
    designReviewed: false,
    a11yReviewed: false,
    stableApi: false,
    addressedApiFeedback: false,
    hasDesignGuidelines: true,
    hasFigmaComponent: true
  }}
/>

## Further reading

[Interface guidelines: Action List + Menu](https://primer.style/design/components/action-list)

## Related components

- [ActionList](/drafts/ActionList2)
- [ActionMenu](/ActionMenu2)

> - [SelectPanel](/SelectPanel)

Reviewer 2: Could we add a ComponentChecklist?
